There were trade and commerce relations between India and Europe
since ancient times. There was great demand for Indian spices like pepper,
cardamom, ginger and many other spices in Europe. The trade relations
between India, Europe and other Asian countries continued even during
the Middle Ages. The Arab merchants carried Asian merchandise into
Constantinople of Eastern Roman (Byzantium) Empire. Italian merchants
would buy these goods and then sell them in European countries.
Constantinople was thus the center of international trade and was
considered as the ‘Gateway of European Trade’. While Arab merchants
had gained monopoly over the trade in Asian countries, Italian traders
had gained monopoly over trade in Europe. The merchandise from Asia
brought good profits to Italian merchants.
The fall of Constantinople: The trade and commerce between Asia
and Europe was taking place through the city of Constantinople. In 1453,
the Ottoman Turks captured the city of Constantinople. As a result, all
the trade routes connecting the city of Constantinople came under the
control of Turks. The Turks started levying too many taxes on the goods
passing through these routes. As a result, trade became unprofitable.
Meanwhile, Spain and Portugal were attempting to break the monopoly
of Italian traders. They started encouraging enterpresing sailors to find
a new sea route to India. The invention of compass, astrolabes, and
gunpowder provided further impetus to this venture.
A new sea route to India: Vasco da Gama, a Portuguese sailor left
Lisbon and reached Kappadu near Calicut on the West coast of India in
1498. thus he was successful in discovering a new sea route to India.
2
This route continued to be the route of trade between India and Europe
for many years. the Portuguese were thus the first to re-establish trade
between India and Europe.
Know this:
In 1869, a huge canal called Suez Canal. was built in Egypt to connect
the Red Sea and Mediterranean Sea. Until the building of Suez Canal, the
sea route discovered by Vasco da Gama was the route used for trade
between India and Europe. The ships had to pass the Cape of Good Hope,
the southernmost tip of Africa, to reach India. The distance between
Mumbai and London through Cape of Good Hope was10,800 nautical
miles (1 nautical mile = 1.85 KMS),whila it was only 6,200 nautical miles
through Suez Canal. the distance was reduced by almost one-half.
European Trade Companies:
	 With the success of the Portuguese, the Dutch, French and the
English arrived in India for trade. This development not only changed the
history of India, it also changed the history of European countries.
Portuguese: The Portuguese were the first to arrive in India for trade
and were also the last to leave India by the sea route. After Vasco da Gama,
Francisco de Almeida arrived in India as the Viceroy of the Portuguese.
He implemented ‘Blue Water Policy’ in order to establish the supremacy
over the sea instead of supremacy over land. Alfonso de Albuquerque,
who came after Almeida, is considered as the real founder of Portuguese
Empire in India. He waged a battle against the Sultan of Bijapur in 1510
and won Goa. Goa became the administrative centre of the Portuguese
administration in India. The Portuguese had absolute monopoly over
trade with India for almost a century but their power declined with the
arrival of English and French in India.
Dutch: Dutch are from Holland or Netherlands. They established
United East India Company in 1602 with the aim of doing business
with eastern countries and came to countries like India, Java, Sumatra,
Indonesia. They established warehouses in Surat, Broach, Cambe,
Cochin, Nagapatinam, Masulipatanam and Chinsura and other places in
India. With this they broke the monopoly of Portuguese in India. Later,
unable to face competition from the English and the French, the Dutch
limited themselves to the Spice Islands in Indonasia.
3
Know this:
The Warehouses were places for storing merchandise. Huge walls
were built around these warehouses to provide protection.
English: On 31st December 1600, Queen Elizabeth issued a royal
charter authorizing the East India Company to trade with Eastern
countries for fifteen years. The company started the business formally in
1613. The Mughal Emperor Jahangir issued a royal permission to English
to establish their first warehouse or factory at Surat. In 1617, Sir Thomas
Roe arrived at the court of Jahangir as the royal ambassador from the
court of James I. He sought permission from Jahangir to establish factories
in other places of Mughal Empire. The English established factories at
Agra, Ahmedabad and Broach. In 1639, the English took Madras from
the King of Chandragiri and established a strong fort named St. George
Fort. Later, Charles II, the Prince of England, gave Bombay on an annual
rent of ten pounds to East India Company in 1668. In 1690, the English
purchased three villages namely Sutanauti, Kalikata and Govindapura
on the banks of Hooghly River and built Fort William. The city of Calcutta
grew around this fort. By the17th century, the English had established
Bombay, Madras and Calcutta as the centers of their Presidencies. By the
later part of 18th century, the English made Calcutta their capital city.
They implemented their own civil and criminal procedure codes in the
areas that were under their control.
4. French: The French East India Company started as a government
owned company in 1664. It started its first factory at Surat in the
year 1668. Later they established its factories in Machalipatinam,
Chandernagore, Mahe, Karaikal, Cassimbazar, Balasore. In 1674, the
French took Valikandapuram from a local Muslim official and developed
it as a major trade center. Later it came to be known as Puducheri or
Pondichery. Dupleix, who arrived (1746) in Pondicherry as the Governor
General of the French had the high ambitions of establishing the French
as a major power in South India. This ambition led to the Carnatic wars
with the English.
The Competition between English and French
The Portuguese and the Dutch had withdrawn from India unable to
withstand the competition from French and English by 18th century.
Finally, French and English resorted to show of strength in order to
establish their political supremacy over India. Meanwhile, political in
4
Instability arosed in the regions of Hyderabad and Carnatic (Eastern
part of Tamil Nadu) and both the English and French tried to exploit the
situation in their favour. This led to three Carnatic Wars.
KEY
B - British
F - French
D - Dutch
P - Portuguese
Chandernagore(F)
5
Know this
Hyderabad Kingdom was established in 1724 by Asaf Jha. His
feudatory Dost Ali who was ruling Carnatic region was not loyal to him.
The Marathas killed Dost Ali in 1740 and looted Carnatic and imprisoned
his son-in-law Chandasheb in Satara. Asaf Jha named Anwaruddin as
the Nawab of Carnatic in the place of Dost Ali.
First Carnatic War (1746-48):
On the request of Dupleix, La Bourdonnais, a French military leader
from Mauritius invaded Madras and captured it. This forced the helpless
British to request the help of Anwaruddin, the Nawab of Carnatic. The
army sent by Anwaruddin failed to defeat the French at Madras. Finally,
La Bourdonnais took money from the English and returned Madras and
went back to Mauritius. This enraged Dupleix and attempted to take
Madras but failed. Finally, the war ended with a treaty in Europe between
France and England called‘Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle’.
Know this:
The Nizam of Hyderabad, Asaf Jha died in 1748. A tussle started between
his son Nasir Jung and his daughter’s son Muzaffar Jung for the throne.
On the other hand, a fight had broken out between Chandasaheb(who
was released from the Maratha prison) and Anwaruddin in Carnatic.
The French extended their support to Muzaffar Jung in Hyderbad and
Chandasaheb in Carnatic. The English extended their support to Nasir
Jung and Anwaruddin.
In 1749, the combined forces of French, Chandasaheb and Muzaffar
Jung defeated Anwaruddin and killed him in the battle of Ambur. As a
result Chandsaheb became the ruler of Carnatic. Mahammad Ali, son of
Anwaruddin, stayed at Tiruchanapalli with the help of the English. In
Hyderabad, Muzaffar Jung became the Nizam by killing Nasir Jung with
the help of French and Chandasaheb. He was killed after a few days.
The French made Salabath Jung, another son of Asaf Jha as the Nizam of
Hyderabad.
Second Carnatic War (1749-1754):
	 In the changed circumstances, French made Salabath Jung,
another son of Asaf Jha as the Nizam of Hyderabad. An officer named
Bussy was stationed in Hyderabad for his protection by the French. In the
Carnatic Chandasaheb had become the Nawab with the help of French.
6
Robert Clive of East India Company attacked Arcot, the capital city of
Carnatic and defeated Chandsaheb. Chandsaheb was imprisoned and
later killed in the war. In the place of Chandsaheb, the English named
Mohammad Ali, the son of Anwaruddin, as the Nawab of Carnatic. The
second Carnatic war ended with the Treaty of Pondicherry. the French
recalled Dupleix. This war brought laurels to English, while French
suffered a political setback.
Third Carnatic War (1756-1763):
	 Count de Lally of the French attempted to besiege Wandiwash in
1760. In this decisive battle, Sir Eyre Coote of the English army defeated
the French and imprisoned Bussy. Lally escaped and hide in Pondicherry.
Finally, Eyre Coote attacked Pondicherry and Lally had to surrender
unconditionally in 1761.
	 The French lost all their bases in India due to the Carnatic wars.
In spite of this, as per the ‘Treaty of Paris’ signed in 1763, Pondicherry
was returned to French. With these developments, the French lost their
importance in India. In this way, the English by defeating all their rivals,
started consolidating their power in Southern India.
Know this:
Robert Clive: Robert Clive, who laid the firm foundation of the British
power in India, had joined the East India Company as clerk. He played
a decisive role in the Carnatic wars, particularly in the siege of Arcot
and played a prominent role in the British victory. He was successful in
establishing the British rule over South India and was instrumental in
Bengal victory also. After the Battle of Plassey in 1757, he gained control
over the Nawab of Bengal also. Clive amassed immense wealth in all
these ventures and helped the East India Company to earn more profit.
Clive returned to England with immense wealth and became a Member of
Parliament. With the return of Clive to England, the East India Company
started facing losses in its business. Even though there were many
allegations against Clive, the British government had to resend Clive to
India to save the company and also save the face of the country.
7
The British won the battle of Buxar and earned back its respect. Clive was
successful in securing the Dewani rights for the British over Bengal, Bihar
and Odisha regions. This brought more wealth to Robert Clive and to East
India Company as well.
Dupleix:
Dupleix was named the Governor General of French regions in India in
1742. He dreamt of achieving French hegemony over India and entered
into treaties with the local kings. Hyder Ali was also trained in the army
of locals raised by Dupleix. The British considered Dupleix as a formidable
challenge to them. Hence, we notice clashes between the French and the
British to gain supremacy over the Carnatic and Deccan Plateau. Dupleix
played an important role in the First Carnatic War in 1746. The rivalry
between the French and the British continued till 1754. Later, the French
government recalled Dupleix as it wanted peace.
The British Rule in India
	 After gaining political control over South India, the British tried
to gain control over the rich Bengal province in the later part of 18th
century. The Bengal province had achieved tremendous growth in the
areas of agriculture, commerce and industry. The East India Company
was making considerable profits from this province. The Dastaks (Licence)
issued by the Mughal ruler Faruk Siar were the main reasons for this.
But, these Dastaks that were limited to the company transactions were
misused by the individual officers of the company too. This resulted in
huge loss to the Bengal government. Hence, all Nawabs from Murashid Ali
Khan to Ali Wardhikhan opposed such misuse. This led to confrontation
between the Nawabs and the Company. This resulted in two crucial wars
which charted a decisive course to Indian history. Plassey and Buxar
were those two wars.
Know this:
Dastak - a license that can ensure anyone to import and export without
paying any tax and transport goods anywhere.
Battle of Plassey (1757): Ali Wardi Khan, the Nawab of Bengal died
in 1756. His grandson Siraj-ud-Daula came to the throne. The Battle of
Plassey took place between the young Nawab Siraj ud-Daulah and the
British in 1757.
8
Reasons:
1. Misuse of Dastaks: Siraj ud-Daulah was furious that the Dastaks
were misused by the officials of the company causing losses to the
government treasury.
2. Mending of the fort without permission: The British repaired
the fort of Calcutta and placed canons in them. This further angered
Siraj-ud-Daula and he ordered the removal of the canons from the fort.
The British refused to do so, angering the Nawab further.
3. Black Room Tragedy: Siraj ud-Daulah conquered Fort William
easily and imprisoned some of Britishers. He imprisoned 146 Englishmen
in a small room in the fort, of which 123 died. This is called as the Black
hole Tragedy. This enraged Robert Clive and arrived in Bengal with a
huge army.
Robert Clive attracted rich locals like Manikchand, Omichand,
Jagath Seth and others towards him. He was successful in convincing
Mir Jaffar, the military head of Siraj-ud-Daula to stay neutral in the
battle by offering him the post of Nawab of Bengal. Encouraged by these
developments, Robert Clive declared war against Siraj-ud-Daula in 1757.
Everything went according to the plan of Clive. Siraj-ud-Daula who tried
to escape from the battlefield, was captured and killed.
Outcome:
	 1. This war brought out the immorality, lack of unity among the
 Indians and the greed of Indian businessmen.
	 2. Mir Jaffar became the Nawab of Bengal.
	 3. The company gained exclusive rights to trade in Bengal.
	 4. Mir Jaffar had to pay Rupees seventeen crores and seventy
 lakhs to Sirja-ud-Daulah as war indemnity for the attack of
 Fort William.
In a nutshell, Mir Jaffar became a victim of the company and its
employees. Eventhough the treasury went bankrupt due to this greedy
nature, the greediness of the company and its officials was never satisfied.
The British projected Mir Jaffar as an inefficient Nawab and brought in
his nephew Mir Qasim as the new Nawab.
9
Battle of Buxar (1764): Mir Qasim was an efficient administrator. In
the beginning he remained loyal to the company. He paid two lakh pounds
to the company and gave away a few places to it. Shortly afterwards,
he declared himself an independent King. After verifying the misuse of
Dastaks, he declared all business was dutyfree in Bengal. Indians
competed against the British in all spheres of business. As a result, the
British trade suffered considerably. This was enough for the British to
oppose the Nawab. They brought in Mir Jaffar again and dethroned Mir
Qasim. As Mir Qasim knew the cunningness of the British, he went for an
organized war against them. He was supported by Indian merchants and
artisans. Mir Qasim entered into agreements with the Mughal ruler Shah
Alam-II and Nawab of Awadh ‘Shuja-ud-daula’. The combined forces of
Mir Qasim faced the British army led by Hector Munro at Buxar in 1764.
Mir Qasim was defeated and ran away from the battlefield. Shah Alam-II
surrendered. The efforts of the combined forces to stop the British failed
miserably.
Outcomes:
1. 	 Shah Alam-II accorded the Dewani rights over Bengal to the
British.
2. 	 Shah Alam-II gave away all the rights over Bengal to the
British for an annual fee of Rupees 26 lakhs.
3. 	 The Nawab of Awadh had to pay a fine of Rupees 50 lakhs
for waging a war against the company.
4. 	 With the death of Mir Jaffar, the company paid pension to
his son and took over the entire administration of Bengal.
Know this:
Diwani Right: The right to
collect land taxes
The battle of Buxar made the British the
real holders of power over Bihar, Bengal and
Odisha provinces. Even Awadh remained
under their control. In 1765, Robert Clive
brought in ‘Dual-government’. As per this, the British had the right to
collect land taxes, whereas the Nawab had power over administrative
issues like justice and others. this way, the British gained political control
over India to protect their business interests.
10
Know this:
 1600 – The East India Company was established
 1602 – United East India Company was established in Netherlands
1619 – The Mughal emperor Jahangir issued a royal charter allowing
 the British to conduct trade in Surat, on the west coast and in
 Hooghly on the east coast.
1639 – The English established their first warehouse in Surat .
1664 – The French East India Company was established in France